[general]
name=TKAP Tools
qgisMinimumVersion=3.34
description=Field tools for the Türkmen-Karahöyük Archaeological Project: stratigraphic phasing, section drawing, and GNSS survey point conversion.
about=The TKAP QGIS tools. Three tools live under the TKAP Tools
    menu:
    .
    Stratigraphic Phasing: splits a layer of Stratigraphic Units into one layer
    per phase for a chosen excavation field, parsing the delimited space_phase
    attribute. An SU spanning several phases is written into every phase layer it
    belongs to. Output goes to live filtered layers, scratch layers, or a
    GeoPackage. A second action exports one phase plan per layer from a print
    layout you designed.
    .
    Section Drawing: draw a section trace in plan view, pick the SUs that cross
    it, place a photo of the excavation wall using surveyed control points, and
    digitise SU polygons against absolute elevation. Outputs a measured drawing
    and a wireframe-over-photo version, both with an elevation axis. Newer than
    the other two tools; treat as beta.
    .
    Survey Points to Polygons: reads Emlid GNSS point exports and connects each
    outline's points in increment order into a closed polygon. Handles both SU_
    points and F_ feature points in one pass, each against its own target layer,
    either replacing geometry on the existing layers or building onto new
    temporary ones. An outline shot out of perimeter order is reordered to
    uncross itself before the polygon is built.
    .
    Licensed GPL-2.0-or-later. See LICENSE in the plugin folder.
version=1.6.3
author=Andrew McGallian
email=andymcgallian@gmail.com

homepage=https://github.com/amcgallian/tkap-qgis
repository=https://github.com/amcgallian/tkap-qgis
tracker=https://github.com/amcgallian/tkap-qgis/issues

tags=archaeology,stratigraphy,excavation,section,emlid,gnss,survey,geometry,polygon,feature
category=Vector
icon=icon.svg
experimental=False
deprecated=False
hasProcessingProvider=no

changelog=1.6.3
    - Section Drawing: heights are ellipsoidal, full stop. "Heights on the
      drawing", "Gap between the two" and "Work it out from a known height..."
      are gone from the setup dialog, and nothing is converted anywhere - not
      the control points, not the recorded SU altitudes the seed boxes come
      from. A section is drawn in the height the receiver measured. The choice
      existed because an orthometric height is only as good as the geoid model
      behind it; the answer was always the raw one, and the controls only ever
      offered a way to get it wrong.
    - What is left is one sentence, when it is needed: a control-point file
      exported with a geoid model set has its Elevation column filled instead of
      the ellipsoidal one and reads about 36 m low. The loader says so and the
      pre-flight checklist repeats it. The fix is to re-export on Global CS -
      there is nothing to correct in the dialog.
    - Opening an existing section is unaffected: its backdrop is reloaded as it
      was drawn, and its saved height datum is read as saved rather than
      relabelled. A section that was placed with a non-zero gap and now needs
      its photo re-placed says so before it moves anything.

    1.6.2
    - Plans from a Plan File: spaces. Pick a Spaces layer and the column holding
      the space number, and every plan gets a third layer alongside its SUs and
      features. The query is usually not written at all: an SU query filtering
      on Sp.110.1 has already said its plan is about space 110, so the spaces
      are read back out of it and become "space" IN ('110', '111'). On the Field
      3 file that gives 15 of the 16 plans a space layer with nothing new to
      write; 3.1 is a bare sunumber list, names no space, and correctly gets
      none. A ...SpacesPlan: block overrides the derived query where a plan
      needs something else.
    - Spaces are drawn above everything - space outlines read over the whole
      plan - and are kept out of the legend, which is what they are wanted for:
      context on the map, not an entry in the key. The export puts each plan's
      space layer straight into the map frame and leaves it unchecked in the
      layer tree, so an auto-updating legend never picks it up. That needs "Set
      map layers per phase", which is on by default; with it off the dialog says
      the spaces will appear in the legend.
    - Export Phase Plans takes two companion groups now rather than one, in draw
      order: Spaces, then Features, then the SUs. Both are matched to their plan
      by name exactly as before.
    - New {spaces} title placeholder, rendering as "109, 61, 118".

    1.6.1
    - Phasing: new "Plans from a Plan File..." action. Split by Phase derives the
      plans from space_phase, which stops being the right answer as soon as a
      publication plan is a hand-picked set - a space-phase minus six SUs, or
      three spaces plus five loose SU numbers. Those decisions get made while
      writing up, so this reads them from a text file: one "Map Title:" per plan,
      with a query block per layer under it (a name ending FeaturesPlan or
      SUsPlan, then the query). "-----" rules mark sections, "#" lines are notes,
      and queries are applied exactly as written - the same string you would type
      into the Query Builder.
    - Each plan becomes a live filtered layer over the SU layer and another over
      the Features layer, both named after the plan, in two groups. That is the
      export dialog's first matching rule, so "Export Phase Plans" pairs them
      with no naming convention to remember, and titles them from the plan file:
      the layers carry their title, number, name and section, so {title} works in
      a title template and is what the handover sets. "Build and Export..." goes
      straight there; "Build layers only" stops at the layers, every one of them
      still editable in the Query Builder.
    - The plan file is checked against the layers before anything is built: one
      row per plan with the SU and feature counts its queries actually select, a
      query that will not run saying which attribute is missing, and a plan
      selecting nothing flagged in red. The counts come from the very layers that
      then get published, so the table is not an estimate. The queries name their
      own columns, so the SU and Features layers are picked from the file rather
      than guessed at by name.
    - "Save a template to fill in..." writes a plan file with the format
      explained in it, around two working example plans, and loads it.
    - The source layers are only ever read. A plan is a separate layer over the
      same source, read-only like the split tool's phase layers, and a rebuild
      that would empty a group asks first and never touches the layers the
      queries ran against.
    - Plans are editable. "Plans are:" chooses what a plan layer is: editable
      copies, the default, which hold their own copy of the features the query
      selected - reshape a polygon for a figure and nothing can reach the
      database, because a copy has no connection to it - or live filtered
      layers, which track the source and keep an editable filter, and whose
      edits are written to the source table. Both run the same query through the
      provider, so they select the same SUs; the dialog spells out the
      difference, in red for the live one. Either way the SU and Features layers
      the queries ran against are still only ever read.
    - Plan layers are named for the plan's title as written - "3.1 Hellenistic
      Pitting and Abandonment", not "3_1_Hellenistic_Pitting_and_Abandonment". A
      QGIS layer name has no characters to sanitise away, and the underscores
      were reaching the exported title whenever a template fell back to the
      layer name. Exported files are still sanitised, so the written file is
      unchanged.
    - The Features group is placed above the Plans group, and each plan's
      features layer is put directly above its SUs in the map frame, so features
      draw on top whether or not "Set map layers per phase" is ticked. Groups are
      only reordered while empty, so no layer can be lost to it.
    - Export Phase Plans: "Zoom map to phase extent" becomes a three-way Map
      extent choice - as set in the layout, each plan's own extent, or one extent
      for all the selected plans. The last keeps a publication sequence at one
      scale and one registration, so leafing through the plans shows the site
      changing rather than the frame moving. Whichever is chosen, the map's own
      extent is now restored when the run finishes, which it was not before.

    1.5.0
    - Fix: a saved section lost its photo backdrop. Reopening one that had been
      saved days earlier showed the drawing on a blank frame, and there was no
      way to get the photo back short of redrawing the section. The rectified
      photo was being written to the Windows temp directory and only that path
      was recorded, so Storage Sense swept it away on its own schedule - and a
      section opened on any other machine never had it at all. Saving now puts
      the placed photo beside the section file as <section>_photo.tif and
      records the path relative to it, so the drawing and its backdrop travel
      together. Existing sections repair themselves on their next save, as long
      as the temp file is still there.
    - Fix: saving a section that had opened without its backdrop wrote an empty
      photo path over the only record of it, so restoring the photo afterwards
      no longer helped. Everything known about the placement is now kept on the
      section whether or not it could be loaded.
    - Section Drawing: sections record how their photo was placed - the
      transform, the control points and the geoid separation behind it. Losing
      the rectified photo is no longer permanent: reopening tries four places in
      turn, ending with placing the original photograph again by itself, and
      says which one worked.
    - Section Drawing: new "Re-link photo..." button under Data sources, beside
      the SU layer control. Takes either the rectified GeoTIFF, which loads as
      it stands, or the original photograph, which is placed again from the
      saved transform. It refuses an image that is not the size the transform
      was measured against - the transform maps pixels, so a re-cropped copy
      would put the drawing somewhere on the wall it never was - and offers to
      pick control points instead. Sections saved before this release have no
      recorded placement, so for those the button goes straight to picking, with
      the trace, flip, datum and extent locked because the units are already
      drawn against them.
    - Note for anyone running mixed versions: a section saved by 1.5.0 opens
      fine in an older build, and now finds its backdrop where it previously
      would not. But saving it from that older build drops the recorded
      placement, so it can no longer re-place the photo by itself.

    1.4.3
    - Fix: opening a section failed outright with "'SectionSession' object has
      no attribute 'has_polygon_for'". Any section holding at least one unit
      hit it, so 1.4.2 could not open a section at all. Removing the
      frame-resize resync in 1.4.2 took that method with it, but the panel
      called it too - once per row, to grey out the units with nothing drawn
      yet - and only the callers inside the session were checked.
    - Section Drawing: sections are drawn in ellipsoidal heights by default,
      and "Heights on the drawing" switches back to orthometric. Ellipsoidal is
      what the receiver actually measures; an orthometric height is only as
      good as the geoid model that produced it, and a receiver carrying the
      wrong model hands over a plausible-looking height that is quietly wrong.
      Whichever is chosen, control points and recorded unit altitudes are both
      converted onto it, so the photo and the seed boxes always agree.
    - Section Drawing: the height correction is now the gap between the two
      datums rather than something taken off every control point, and it is
      applied only to heights arriving on the other datum. A section records
      which datum it was drawn in, states it in the section CRS, and reopens on
      it; sections saved before this release reopen as orthometric, which is
      what they were.
    - Section Drawing: the pre-flight checklist says which datum the heights
      are on, and objects when control points sit on the datum the drawing is
      not using with no gap set to carry them across - the one case where
      everything still fits and the elevation axis is silently 36 m out.
    1.4.2
    - Section Drawing: resizing the frame no longer re-decides which units the
      section holds. Cropping the frame is a framing decision, and having rows
      appear and disappear in the middle of it was more annoying than useful.
      Which units a section holds is set at setup and changed only by
      "Add unit..." and "Remove".
    - Fix: the section panel could force the whole QGIS window taller. A dock
      hands its minimum height to the main window, so a tall panel grew the
      window instead of getting a scroll bar - measured at 879 px before, 150 px
      now. The panel scrolls, and Save and Finish sit outside the scrolling
      area so the way out is always on screen.
    - Fix: collapsing the panel's sections left them spread down the middle of
      it. They now stack against the top, with the spare height below them.
    1.4.1
    - Fix: the wireframe backdrop colour appeared to do nothing. It was being
      drawn correctly, but a placed ortho is axis-aligned and fills the frame,
      so the backdrop sat behind it with nothing to show through. There is now
      a "Fade the photo" setting next to it, which knocks the photo back
      towards the backdrop so the outlines read over a bright wall - and which
      is what makes the backdrop colour mean anything.
    - Fix: most of the export controls did not redraw the preview. The frame
      box, the height-line interval, every label and caption control and all
      the wireframe colours changed the output without changing the picture of
      it. They all redraw now. Resolution deliberately does not, since the
      preview renders at its own.
    - Section Drawing: the unit table's columns can be dragged to any width,
      and reordered. They were fixed to their contents or stretched, which on a
      seven-column table in a narrow dock meant the column you needed to read
      was the one you could not widen.
    1.4.0
    - Section Drawing: units can be given a name of their own, and each unit
      decides for itself what the drawing writes on it. Type a name into the new
      Label column - "rocky fill" rather than a number - and set the Shows
      column to Number, Label, Number and label, or Nothing. Per unit, not per
      drawing, because a section usually wants numbers throughout with two or
      three units named and a thin lens left blank.
    - Section Drawing: labels can be sized, or turned off altogether for a clean
      unlabelled plate. They were fixed at 8 pt and always on.
    - Section Drawing: the wireframe's outline colour, outline width and
      backdrop colour are settable. Yellow on near-black suits most excavation
      photographs and vanishes over a pale sunlit wall.
    - Section Drawing: the caption under the title can be typed by hand, or
      left off. By default it now reads which way the section is viewed and at
      what scale - "Looking north - 1:20" - replacing the line that restated
      the trace's name, azimuth and length.
    - Section Drawing: the export dialog remembers what you used last, per
      output kind, so page size, scale, resolution and colours no longer reset
      on every export. Title and caption are deliberately not remembered, since
      they name one particular section.
    1.3.0
    - Fix: Section Drawing's "Remove" did not remove. It deleted the unit's
      polygon straight through the data provider, underneath the edit session
      the drawing layer is held in, so the layer went on showing it and undo
      knew nothing about it - and it left the unit in the roster, looking like
      it had failed to draw. Removing now goes through the edit session (so
      Ctrl+Z works) and takes the unit out of the list as well.
    - Section Drawing: resizing the frame now re-decides which units the
      section holds. Units the frame takes in are seeded, and units it no
      longer reaches are dropped - but only while they are still untouched
      seeds. Anything drawn on or given a height is kept whatever the frame
      does, and named in the message, because tidying a list is never worth
      losing someone's tracing.
    - Section Drawing: every part of the panel collapses now, not just the
      frame, and each remembers whether you left it open.
    - Section Drawing: "Re-seed" has a button. It was written and documented
      but never wired to anything, so there was no way to put a fresh seed box
      back after editing one.
    1.2.1
    - Fix: reopening a saved section then pressing "Add unit..." failed with
      "This session has no source SU layer to add from". A saved section carries
      only its drawing, and nothing recorded which SU layer it was drawn from,
      so after a QGIS restart there was nothing to add units from and no way to
      say what it should be.
    - Saved sections now record their SU layer, and reopening looks it up again
      by id, then by data source, then by name - so a rebuilt project, a
      renamed layer or moved data still finds it. Sections saved before this
      release have nothing recorded, and are handled the same way as a layer
      that cannot be found.
    - Section Drawing: a "Data sources" section in the panel shows which SU
      layer the section reads from and lets it be changed at any time, which
      also repoints the symbology and the export. "Add unit..." now offers to
      pick a layer instead of refusing.
    - Section Drawing: the "Section frame" panel section is collapsible and
      starts collapsed, giving the height back to the SU roster. Both panel
      sections remember whether you left them open.
    1.2.0
    - Section Drawing: the section frame can be resized while you draw. Press
      "Resize on canvas" in the panel and drag its corners or edges, or type
      exact chainage and elevation limits. The frame is what the exported figure
      covers, so cropping it crops the drawing - which means an ortho that
      covers more wall than the section no longer has to be cut down first.
      "Fit to photo" and "Reset to trace" are there for the common cases, and a
      cropped frame is kept when the section is saved and reopened.
    - Section Drawing: the control-point photo is now sharp when you zoom in.
      The full-resolution pixels for whatever you are looking at are read on
      demand and drawn over the overview, so a nailhead resolves instead of
      dissolving into the downsampled preview it used to be clicked on. Memory
      does not grow with the size of the ortho.
    1.1.1
    - Fix: the Survey Points to Polygons window opened taller than the screen
      once both point types had a target row, putting Run and Close off the
      bottom with no way to reach them. The settings now sit in a scrolling
      panel, the log and both buttons stay outside it and are always visible,
      and the window opens no larger than the display it lands on.
    1.1.0
    - Emlid to SU is now Survey Points to Polygons, and builds feature outlines
      as well as SU outlines. F_ points (F_[Field].[Feature]-[n]) are read
      alongside SU_ points and written to the Features layer, matched on the
      feature number against its Feature field.
    - One run does both: each point type has its own target layer and number
      field, and either can be switched off. Pointing both at the same layer is
      refused rather than filing feature numbers as SU numbers.
    - Crossover check. An outline whose points were shot out of perimeter order
      makes a self-crossing "bowtie" polygon; it is now reordered to uncross
      itself before the polygon is built, changing the recorded order as little
      as possible so concave outlines stay concave. Each fix is logged with the
      increments involved, and QC layers still show the shots as recorded so the
      result can be checked against them. 74 of the 486 outlines in the seasons
      archive self-cross.
    - Feature-number field on the target layer defaults to Feature, SU to SU,
      and each target layer is preselected by which of those fields it carries.
    - Temporary-layer mode builds one layer per point type, each carrying the
      number, the vertex count, and how many crossings were undone.
    - QC layers are named QC_SU_<n> / QC_F_<n> and carry TYPE and NUMBER, so SU
      55 and Feature 55 no longer collide.
    1.0.0
    - First release.
